add detecting (#2)
afogel/blog_personal: src/content/post/detecting_llm_streaming_completion.mdx

---

> title: Detecting Completion of LLM Streaming Responses

Reviewer: The title could be improved - there's no real hook here. It's consult with Chat/Claude.
There are title formats that are proved to work, and it's worth sticking with them (IMO).

> excerpt: A vanilla JavaScript solution for detecting when streaming responses from Large Language Models have completed

Reviewer: This is better than the title, but I'd still try to refine.

publishDate: 2024-08-13T00:00:00Z
image: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1643780668909-580822430155?q=80&w=2664&auto=format&fit=crop&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=M3wxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8fA%3D%3D
category: Web Development
tags:
  - JavaScript
  - LLM
  - MutationObserver
  - Streaming
  - web development
  - exactly-once message delivery
  - exactly-once events
metadata:
  canonical: 'https://fogel.dev/detecting_llm_streaming_completion'
---

# Detecting Completion of LLM Streaming Responses: A Vanilla JavaScript Solution

## Introduction

> In the world of Large Language Model (LLM) integrations, streaming responses have become the norm, offering a more dynamic and engaging user experience. However, this advancement brings a unique challenge: how do we reliably detect when a streaming response has completed, especially when we need to perform actions based on the complete response?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the world of Large Language Model (LLM) integrations, with platforms such as ChatGPT and Claude, streaming responses have become the norm, offering a more dynamic and engaging user experience. However, this advancement brings a unique challenge: how do we reliably detect when a streaming response has completed, especially when we need to perform actions based on the complete response?
```

Reviewer: I am missing 1-2 sentences on the post's target audience.
Something of that nature:
"So if you're building X,Y or Z - this post is for you."
"So if you've encountered problems such as K, L or M - this post is for you."
And so on. Should appear as early as possible - to avoid losing good readers (and to drop bad readers that anyway won't last till the end since it's irrelevant for them).

> 

Reviewer: Like

> While this challenge might seem straightforward at first glance, it becomes more complex when we consider the constraints of working without heavy frameworks or backend solutions. This is particularly relevant if you're using a library like HTMX, Hotwire, building a browser extensions, or find yourself in a situation where a lightweight, frontend-only solution is preferable.

Reviewer: Like

## Understanding the Streaming Pattern

Before we dive into the proposed approach, it's important to understand a common pattern used in LLM streaming interfaces. Many implementations, including popular ones like ChatGPT, use a specific class (e.g. `streaming` or `result-streaming`) to indicate the status of the response:

1. When a new response starts streaming, a new DOM node is created with a 'streaming' class.
2. As the response continues to stream, content is added to this node.
3. Once the streaming is complete, the 'streaming' class is removed from the node.

This pattern provides a clear, DOM-based signal for the start and end of streaming, which we can leverage in our solution.

## The Challenge of Reliable Detection

The key challenge lies in creating a solution that can:

1. Detect when new response nodes are added to the DOM (which could happen at any time).
2. For each new node, watch for the removal of the 'streaming' class.
3. Perform an action exactly once when the streaming is complete.
4. Handle multiple simultaneous streaming responses without interference.

> To address these requirements, we need a two-stage approach using the `MutationObserver` API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address these requirements, and after testing other, less robust approaches such as: <A> and <B>, I decided to go with a two-stage approach using the `MutationObserver` API.
```

Reviewer: For example:
A == using a single observer

Reviewer: I'd add here something like - the first one to observe the addition of new nodes to the DOM, and the second one to observe the mutations of the newly added DOM.

## The Crucial Role of the Two-Stage Approach

> After breaking down our implementation, it's important to understand why we use a two-stage approach with separate observers, rather than a single `MutationObserver`. This design choice is crucial for the reliability and efficiency of our solution.

Reviewer: This paragraph is redundant, I'd drop it and it's title.

### Why Not Use a Single Observer?

You might wonder: "Why can't we just use one `MutationObserver` to watch for both new messages and the completion of streaming?" It's a valid question, and understanding the answer reveals key insights about how `MutationObserver` works and the challenges of LLM streaming responses.

> 1. **Granularity of Actions**: We need to perform specific actions (like capturing the full text) for each individual message when it completes streaming. A single observer would make it difficult to associate actions with specific messages.

Reviewer: I think this section is unclear (even for me, and I know what you want to say)

> 2. **Timing of Disconnection**: We need to stop observing each message node once its streaming is complete. With a single observer, we can't selectively stop watching one node while continuing to watch for new messages.

Reviewer: In order to enforce the "exactly once" action per node, we need to stop observing....

> 3. **Preventing Duplicate Events**: This is a crucial point that deserves special attention. Let's explore it further with two examples.

Reviewer: Redundant - try to remove completely any "more on that to come"

### The Problem with Premature Disconnection

> To prevent duplicate events and unnecessary processing, we need to stop observing a message node once its streaming is complete. However, with a single observer, attempting to disconnect after processing a message leads to significant issues. Let's look at what happens when we try to disconnect the observer after processing a message:

Reviewer: WDYM by "attempting to disconnect after processing a message". Also, you repeat yourself again in final line.
